CSS properties: mask-mode and mask-type (#39287)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/css/mask-type/index.md

mask-type: alpha;

/* Global values */

> mask-type: inherit;

Author: oops, that was a mistake. Thanks.

mask-type: revert;
mask-type: revert-layer;
mask-type: unset;
```

### Values

The `mask-type` property value is either `alpha` or `luminance`:

- `alpha`
  - : Indicates that the alpha values of the `<mask>` should be used.
- `luminance`
  - : Indicates that the luminance values of the `<mask>` should be used.

## Description

> The `mask-type` property is only relevant when applied to the `<mask>` element. The property defines the resolved value of the {{cssxref("mask-mode")}} property value if the `mask-mode` property is explicitly set to, or defaults to, `match-source`. If `mask-mode` is set to any `<masking-mode>` value other than `match-source`, that value takes precedence, overriding the `mask-type` value of the applied mask.

Reviewer: - I suggest we first explain mask-type, its values before explaining how `mask-mode` interacts with it. So this part about `mask-mode` could be moved later.
```suggestion
The `mask-type` property is only relevant for the SVG `<mask>` element. If you set `mask-type: luminance`, the mask will use how bright each part of the mask is; if you set `mask-type: alpha`, it will use how transparent or opaque each part is.
```

The opacity of a `luminance` mask is determined by the `R`, `G`, `B`, and `A` values of an `rgb()` color. The equation is `((0.2125 * R) + (0.7154 * G) + (0.0721 * B)) * A`. In a `luminance` mask, the color `green`, being `#008000` or `rgb(0% 50% 0% / 1)`, any area masked by a solid `green` mask will be `35.77%` opaque. If set to `alpha`, as `green` is a fully opaque color meaning the mask is `100%` opaque.

If the `<mask>` is defined as the mask image's source, and the `mask-mode` is set or defaults to `match-source`, the `mask-mode` will resolve to the `<mask>` element's `mask-type` value; `luminance` or `alpha`. If not explicitly set, the value defaults to `luminance`.

If the mask image source is not an SVG `<mask>`, this property has no effect.

> 

Reviewer: - and then somewhere here, move the `mask-mode` from earlier
- Your earlier sentence, "The property defines the resolved value of the {{cssxref("mask-mode")}} property value if the `mask-mode` property is explicitly set to, or defaults to, `match-source`.", is a bit hard to follow. WDYT about this phrasing.
- Also adding another sentence to contrast between mask-type and mask-mode
```suggestion
### Effect of `mask-mode` on `mask-type`

While the `mask-type` property is set on the SVG `<mask>` element, the {{cssxref("mask-mode")}} property is set on the element being masked (the element you're applying the mask to).

The default value of `mask-mode` is `match-source`, which means the browser uses the `mask-type` value from the `<mask>` element to determine how to interpret it. If `mask-mode` is set to a value other than `match-source`, that value takes precedence and overrides the `mask-type` value of the applied mask.
```

## Formal definition

{{cssinfo}}

## Formal syntax

{{csssyntax}}

> ## Examples

Reviewer: - Though optional, would it be helpful for readers if there's a second example using `<div>` elements instead of `<img>`? It could make it easier to focus directly on the masking effect without image details getting in the way.
- Also, how about demo'ing the effect of different `mask-mode` values, especially the effect of the non-default value. (similar to what's in the spec)

mask-type: unset;
```

### Values

- `alpha`
  - : Indicates that the alpha (transparency) values of the `<mask>` should be used.
- `luminance`
  - : Indicates that the [luminance (brightness) values](#understanding-luminance) of the `<mask>` should be used.

## Description

> The `mask-type` property is only relevant for the SVG `<mask>` element. If you set `mask-type: luminance`, the mask will use how bright each part of the mask is; if you set `mask-type: alpha`, it will use how transparent or opaque each part is.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `mask-type` property is only relevant for the SVG `<mask>` element. If you set `mask-type: luminance`, the mask will use how bright each part of the mask is; if you set `mask-type: alpha`, it will use how transparent or opaque each part of the mask is.
```

### Default behavior

> By default, the `<mask>` element uses `mask-type: luminance`. This means both the color and the transparency of the mask content affect masking. Whether the mask is opaque partially depends on the lightness of the color of the opaque areas:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the SVG `<mask>` element uses `mask-type: luminance`. This means both the color and the transparency of the mask content affect masking. Whether the mask is opaque partially depends on the lightness of the color of the opaque areas:
```

- Fully opaque white areas (100% luminance) will be masked and visible.
- Black (0% luminance) or fully transparent areas will be clipped and invisible.
- Areas with intermediate luminance values will be partially masked, reflecting both the luminance, or lightness of the mask color, and the alpha transparency of each area of the mask.

### Understanding luminance

The opacity of a `luminance` mask is determined by the `R`, `G`, `B`, and `A` values of an `rgb()` color using the following formula:

`((0.2125 * R) + (0.7154 * G) + (0.0721 * B)) * A`

For example, the color `green` (`#008000` or `rgb(0% 50% 0% / 1)`) has a luminance value of `35.77%`. Any area masked by a solid `green` luminance mask will be `35.77%` visible. If the `mask-type` is set to `alpha`, the same fully opaque `green` color will make the masked area `100%` visible.

> If the SVG `<mask>` element has `fill="rgb(0 0 0 / 0.5)"`, which is a 50% transparent black, the corresponding shape on the masked element will display at 50% opacity when using `alpha` as the value, as it is a color at 50% opacity, but if the `mask-type` defaults or is explicitly set to `luminance`, as the luminance is `0`, the masked area will be clipped and invisible.

Reviewer: Very long sentence
```suggestion
If the SVG `<mask>` element has `fill="rgb(0 0 0 / 0.5)"`, which is a 50% transparent black, the corresponding shape on the masked element will display at 50% opacity when `mask-type ` is set to `alpha` because the alpha values is `0.5` (50% opacity). But if the `mask-type` defaults to or is set as `luminance` the masked area will be fully clipped and invisible because its luminance is `0`.
```

### Effect of `mask-mode` on `mask-type`

While the `mask-type` property is set on the SVG `<mask>` element, the {{cssxref("mask-mode")}} property is set on the element being masked (the element you're applying the mask to).
If the mask image source is not an SVG `<mask>`, this property has no effect.

The default value of `mask-mode` is `match-source`, which means the browser uses the `mask-type` value from the `<mask>` element to determine how to interpret it. If `mask-mode` is set to a value other than `match-source`, that value takes precedence and overrides the `mask-type` value of the applied mask.

> If the `<mask>` is defined as the mask image's source, and the `mask-mode` is set or defaults to `match-source`, the `mask-mode` will resolve to the `<mask>` element's `mask-type` value; `luminance` or `alpha`. If not explicitly set, the value defaults to `luminance`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the `<mask>` is defined as the mask image's source, and the `mask-mode` is set as or defaults to `match-source`, the `mask-mode` will resolve to the `<mask>` element's `mask-type` value: `luminance` or `alpha`. If not explicitly set, the value defaults to `luminance`.
```

## Formal definition

{{cssinfo}}

## Formal syntax

{{csssyntax}}

## Examples

### Using the `mask-type` property

This example demonstrates how to use the `mask-type` property and the effect of its different values.

#### HTML

We've included two images that will be masked. Other than their class names, the two images are identical.

> We've also included an SVG with two `<mask>` elements. Other than their `id` values, the two masks are also identical; each with a green and white heart shape and a semi-transparent white and black filled circle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We've also included an SVG with two `<mask>` elements. Other than their `id` values, the two masks are also identical: each has a green and white heart shape and a semi-transparent white-and-black-filled circle.
```

## See also

- {{cssxref("mask")}}
- {{cssxref("mask-mode")}}
- [CSS masking](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_masking) module

> - SVG {{svgattr("mask-type")}} attribute

Author: not sure why the preview is showing a missing end quote here.
